the digital divide is a mother
sold and can't get a job because she
doesn't know how to use a computer it is
an immigrant that doesn't know that he
can call his family for free it is a
child that can't resolve his homework
because he doesn't have access to
information digital divide is a new
illiteracy digital divide is also
defined as a gap between individuals and
communities that have access to
information technologies and those that
don't why does this happen
it happens because of three things the
first is that people can't get access to
this these technologies because they
can't afford them the second is because
they don't know how to use them and the
third is because they don't know the
benefits derived from technology so
let's consider some very basic
statistics the population of the world
is nearly 7 billion people out of these
approximately 2 billion are digitally
included this is approximately 30% of
the entire world population which means
that the remaining 70% of the world
close to 5 billion people do not have
access to a computer or the Internet
let's think about that number for second
five billion people that's four times
the population of India but have never
touched a computer have never accessed
internet so this is a digital abyss that
we're talking about this is not a
digital divide here we can see a map by
Chris Harrison that shows the internet
connections around the world what we can
see is that most of the internet
connections are centered on North
America and Europe while the rest of the
world is engulfed in the dark shadow of
digital divide next we can see
connections city-to-city around the
world and we can see that most of the
information generated is being generated
between North America and Europe while
the rest of the world is not
broadcasting their ideas or information
and so what does this mean we are living
in a world that seems to be having a
digital revolution a revolution that we
everyone here thinks that were part of
but the 70% of the world that is
digitally excluded is not part of this
what does this mean well the people that
will be digitally excluded won't be able
to compete in the labor markets of the
future they won't be connected
we'll be less informed they'll be less
inspired and they'll be less responsible
Internet should not be a luxury it
should be a right because it is a basic
social necessity of the 21st century we
can't operate without it it allows us to
connect to the world it empowers us it
gives us social participation it is a
tool for change and so how are we going
to bridge this digital divide well there
are many models the try and bridge the
digital divide the try and include the
population at large but the question is
are they really working I'm sure
everybody here knows One Laptop Per
child where one computer is given to one
child the problem with this is do we
really want children to take computers
to their homes homes that have adverse
conditions and we must also understand
that by giving a child a computer we
also transferring costs very high costs
such as internet connection
electricity maintenance software updates
so we must create different models
models that help the families rather
than add a burden on them also let's not
forget about the carbon footprint
imagine five billion laptops what would
the world look like that imagine the
hazardous residue that would be
generated from that imagine the trash so
if we give one computer to one person
and we multiply that times five billion
even if that laptop is $100 then we
would have 483 trillion dollars now
let's consider we're only counting in
the youth ages 10 through 24 that's
approximately 30% of the digitally
excluded population then that would be
145 trillion dollars what nation has
this amount of money this is not a
sustainable model so with this in mind
we create a different model we created
the Curia in Spanish or in English
learning and innovation network which is
a network of community centers that
bring education through the use of
technology we wanted to increase the
number of users per computer in such a
way that we could dilute the cost of
infrastructure the cost per user and
that we could bring educate
and technology to everybody within these
communities so let's look at a basic
comparison the RIA has 1,650 computers
if we had used the One Laptop Per child
model of a one to one ratio then we
would have benefited 1,650 users and
what we did instead is we set up centers
that have longer hours of operation than
schools that also include all of the
population our youngest user has 3 years
old the oldest has 86 and with this in
less than two years we were able to
reach a hundred and forty thousand users
out of which out of which thirty four
thousand have already graduated from our
courses another thing of One Laptop Per
child is that it doesn't guarantee that
you the educational use of a computer so
technology is nothing without that
content we need to use it as a means not
an end so how did we how do we
accomplish such a high impact well you
can't just go in into a community and
pretend to change it you need to look at
a lot of factors so what we do is we do
a thing that we call urban acupuncture
we first start by looking at the basic
geography of a site so take for example
look at the pic this is one of the most
densely populated municipalities in
Mexico it has a very low income level
and so we look at the basic geography we
look at roads streets the flux of
pedestrians and vehicles then we look at
income we look at education and then we
set up the center there in the place
that's going to heal the body a little
needle to change the city body and there
we go and so there are four basic
elements that we need to consider when
we're using education for the youth
education through technology the first
one is that we need to create spaces we
need to create a space that is welcoming
to the community a space that is
according to the needs of the children
and of the elders and and of every every
possible person that lives within that
community so we create these spaces that
are all made with recycled materials we
use modular architecture to lower the
the impacts the ecological impact and
well the second connection by connection
I mean not only a connection to the
Internet that's too easy
we need to create a connection that's an
interconnection of humans the Internet
is a very complex organism that is
fueled of the ideas the thoughts and the
emotions of human beings we need to
create networks that aid in exchanging
information
third content education is nothing
without content and you can't pretend to
have a relationship of only a computer
with a child so we create a route a very
basic learning route where we teach
people how to use a computer how to use
the internet how to use office software
and in 72 hours
we create digital citizens you can't
pretend that people are just going to
touch a computer and become digitally
included you need to have a process and
after this then they can take on on a
longer educational route and then forth
training we need to train not only the
users but we need to train the people
that will facilitate learning for these
people when you're talking about the
digital divide people have stigmas
people have fears people don't
understand how that can complement their
lives so what we do is we train
facilitators so that they can help in
breaking that digital barrier and then
so we have four elements we have a space
that's created we have a connection we
have content and we have training so we
have created a digital learning
community there's one more element which
is the benefits that technology can
create because it is not printed static
content it is dynamic it is modifiable
so what we do is we provide contents
then we do training and then we analyze
the user patterns so that we can improve
content so it creates a virtuous circle
it allows us to deliver education
according to different types of
intelligence and according to different
user needs so with this in mind we have
to think that technology is is something
that we can modify according to human
processes I want to share a story
in 2006 I want to live here this is one
of the poorest communities in all of
Mexico I went to film a documentary on
the people that live off trash entirely
of trash their houses are built with
rice they eat trash they dress in trash
and after two months of living with them
of seeing the children and the way they
they work I understood that the only
thing that can change and that can break
the poverty cycle is education and we
can use technology to bring education to
these communities here is another shot
and the main message is that technology
is not going to save the world we are
and we can use technology to help us I'm
sure everybody here has experienced it
what moves technology is human energy so
let's use this energy to make the world
a better place thank
you